{
  "sonnets": [
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 1",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Procreation",
      "sonnet_text": "From fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
But as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory.
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament
And only herald to the gaudy spring
Within thine own bud buriest thy content
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
  Pity the world, or else this glutton be--
  To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 2",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Procreation; Time's decay",
      "sonnet_text": "When forty winters shall besiege thy brow
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
Will be a tattered weed of small worth held.
Then being asked where all thy beauty lies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
To say within thine own deep-sunken eyes
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use
If thou couldst answer \"This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,\"
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
  This were to be new made when thou art old
  And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 3",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Procreation; the mirror",
      "sonnet_text": "Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
Now is the time that face should form another,
Whose fresh repair if thou shouldst not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
For where is she so fair whose uneared womb
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb
Of his self-love, to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
So in far more that glass may yet possess thee
Which of thyself too quickly hast outrun time.
  Prithee, no more, lest while thou spoil'st so much,
  Thou'rt unblest, ere thou die, of soul-surpassing touch."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 4",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Procreation; waste of beauty",
      "sonnet_text": "Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
Upon thyself thy beauty's legacy?
Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
And being frank she lends to those are free.
Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
So great a sum of sums yet canst not live?
For having traffic with thyself alone,
Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive.
Then how, when nature calls thee to be gone,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
  Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
  Which used lives th' executor to be."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 5",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Time and preservation",
      "sonnet_text": "Those hours that with gentle work did frame
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell
Will play the tyrants to the very same
And rack the beauty that they did excel.
For never-resting time leads summer on
To hideous winter and confounds him there,
Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
Beauty o'ersnowed and bareness everywhere.
Then, were not summer's distillation left,
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was.
  But flowers distilled, though they with winter meet,
  Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 6",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Preservation through marriage",
      "sonnet_text": "Then let not winter's ragged hand deface
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled.
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
With beauty's treasure, ere it be self-killed.
That use of beauty aye might be supplied
As nature forms no longer than she may;
There can not be a death benefit by it;
For that sweet use, too precious is the time.
Live on thyself in other objects dear:
By loan to thee, beauty may be improved
And rich in giving, not a usurer.
Who others give thee of this, and not be moved,
  Begot by your dear face to grow to thee
  Is the best hope of all posterity."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 7",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Beauty's setting sun",
      "sonnet_text": "Lo, in the orient when the gracious light
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage.
But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
From his low tract, and look another way.
  So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon,
  Unlooked on diest, unless thou get a son."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 8",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Music and harmony",
      "sonnet_text": "Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.
Why lovest thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing;
  Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one,
  Sings this to thee: \"Thou single wilt prove none.\""
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 9",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Self-murder and widowhood",
      "sonnet_text": "Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
That thou consum'st thyself in single life?
Ah, if thou issue a world-without-end lie,
The world will weep that thou wast ever wife.
The world will be thy widow and still weep
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
When every private widow well may keep
By children's eyes her husband's shape in mind.
Look, what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
And kept unused, the user so destroys it.
  No love toward others in that bosom sits
  That on himself such murderous shame commits."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 10",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Pity the world, change your mind",
      "sonnet_text": "For shame! Deny that thou bear'st love to any,
Who in thy self so richly art endowed,
Yet canst not find a heart to use it many,
But mak'st waste to ruin of thy proud.
Look, what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
And kept unused, the user so destroys it.
No love toward others in that bosom sits
That on himself such murderous shame commits.
  Make thee new self to make thy beauty live
  Where fame and honor can preserve the past."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 11",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Nature's provision",
      "sonnet_text": "As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou growest
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestowest
Thou mayst call thine when all the best thou hast converted.
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
Without this, folly, age, and cold decay.
If all were minded so, the times should cease
And three score year would make the world away.
Let those whom Nature hath not made for store,
Harsher, and colder, nature's hand of nobler race,
Who are not meant to make the world love more
By setting forth an everlasting place.
  She gave thee beauty for this cause's sake,
  For love to love must of necessity be."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 12",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Time and procreation",
      "sonnet_text": "When I do count the clock that tells the time,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
When I behold the violet past prime,
And sable curls all silvered o'er with white;
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves,
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard;
Then of thy beauty do I question make,
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
And die as fast as they see others grow;
  And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defense
  Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 13",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Mutability",
      "sonnet_text": "O, that you were yourself! But, love, you are
No longer yours than you yourself here live.
Against this coming end you should prepare,
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Find no decay to bind him to his will,
But rather should the copy of your peace
Keep state on earth, and after you live still.
That is your father's face, who, when he dead,
Looked on, made him think life's beauty whole;
But now it is the time of your own bed
That you shall die, begetting your own soul.
  You had a father; let your son say so.
  Your single state is self-will and not so."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 14",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Astrology and progeny",
      "sonnet_text": "Not from the stars do I my judgment pluck,
And yet methinks I have astronomy;
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
Pointing to each his thunder, rain, and wind,
Or say with princes if it shall go well
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
And, constant stars, in them I read such art
As truth and beauty shall together thrive,
If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert.
  Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
  Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 15",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Time's brief stage; the poet's gift",
      "sonnet_text": "When I consider everything that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Cheered and checked even by the selfsame sky,
Vast strength in weakness, wisdom in excess,
And all on one foundation builded high;
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Where Time decays all, with his sweet decay;
So I, against this ruin, will impart
  That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
  When all the world is dead, you'll still be light."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 16",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Procreation over poetry",
      "sonnet_text": "But wherefore do not you a mightier way
Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time,
And fortify yourself in your decay
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
With virtuous wish would bear your living flowers,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit.
So should the lines of life that life repair,
Which this time's hand, nor that quiet time's pen,
Can draw, nor that self-figured face, so fair
As you excel so much in every sense
  To give away yourself keeps yourself still,
  And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 17",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Immortal verse",
      "sonnet_text": "Who will believe my verse in time to come
If it were filled with your most high deserts?
Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb
Which hides your life and shows not half your parts.
If I could write the beauty of your eyes
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
The age to come would say, 'This poet lies;
Such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces.'
So should my papers, yellowed with their age,
Be scorned, like old men of less truth than boast,
And your true rights be termed a poet's rage
And stretched invention of a banished ghost.
  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  You should live twice, in it and in my rhyme."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 18",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Eternal summer",
      "sonnet_text": "Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate.
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or nature's changing course, untrimmed.
But thy eternal summer shall not fade
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade
When in eternal lines to time thou growest.
  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
  So long lives this, and this gives life to thee."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 19",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Time's tyranny and the poet's vow",
      "sonnet_text": "Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
And burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood.
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet'st,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
O, carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen.
Him in thy course untainted do allow
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
  Yet do thy worst, old Time; despite thy wrong,
  My love shall in my verse ever live young."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 20",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth's perfect nature (and gender)",
      "sonnet_text": "A woman's face with Nature's own hand painted
Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion;
A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion;
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
A man in hue, all 'hues' in his controlling,
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created,
Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
And by addition me of thee defeated
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
  But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure,
  Mine be thy love, and thy love's use their treasure."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 21",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Rejection of artificial praise",
      "sonnet_text": "So is it not with me as with that Muse,
Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse,
Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
Making a gross comparison of sounds
Which to the ear is not acceptable;
Nor I with those that gilding flowers with grounds
Or with a star's brightness, or a gem of double rate.
Let those paint more that for a show contend;
I would not be ambitious in my mind,
To give my love a name to make it known;
And so I muse, for others to behold
  My verse is truest that to love doth show
  The love I bear is simple, though I do not know."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 22",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love's shared heart",
      "sonnet_text": "My glass shall not persuade me I am old
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
Then look I death my life should terminate.
For all that beauty that doth cover thee
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me.
How can I then be elder than thou art?
O, therefore, love, be of thyself so wary
As I, not for myself, but for thee will,
Making thy chest the wardrobe of my care,
Where all my joys are lodged and thou in all.
  For there thy heart, which I should keep as well,
  If all too soon, take heed, and do not fall."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 23",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The unexpressed love",
      "sonnet_text": "As an unperfect actor on the stage
Who, with his fear, is put besides his part,
Or some fierce thing, replete with too much rage,
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart,
So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
And in mine own love lose my love's due might,
As a great burden is but weakness' sway.
O, let my books be then the eloquence
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Who plead for love and look for recompense
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed.
  O, learn to read what silent love hath writ:
  To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 24",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The eye as artist",
      "sonnet_text": "Mine eye hath played the painter and hath steeled
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
And perspective it is best painter's art.
For through the painter must you see his skill,
And where the painter's skill is shown, your eye
Looks upon a picture, which his skill doth fill
With lines and colors, that the heart's survey.
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
They draw but what they see, know not what lies
Within the heart's dark chamber, which no dart
Of sun can pierce, no, not the sun's bright eyes.
  O, then best work, where most best form is shown,
  A painted image on a painted ground."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 25",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Glory vs. quiet love",
      "sonnet_text": "Let those who are in favor with their stars
Of public honor and proud titles boast,
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,
Unlooked-for joy in that I honor most.
Great princes' favorites their fair leaves spread
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
And in themselves their glory bide not dead,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrior, famousèd for fight,
After a thousand victories once foiled,
Is from the book of honor razed quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he toiled.
  Then happy I, that love and am beloved,
  Where I may not remove nor be removed."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 26",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love as a humble offering",
      "sonnet_text": "Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
To thee I send this written embassage,
To witness duty, not to show my wit.
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May well be dumb, and cannot well express;
But what love sends, that is my soul's design,
Which in thy face I see, and no less.
For should I not say that I am thine,
My love would be despised, and I should blame
My star, that I was not of worth enough
To love thee, or to tell thee that I love.
  Till then, in such a dress of thought I'll hide
  My love from others, and my hope from pride."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 27",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Restless absence",
      "sonnet_text": "Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
The dear repose for limbs with travel tired;
But then begins a journey in my head
To work my mind, when body's work's expired.
For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.
Save that my soul's imaginary sight
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,
Makes black night beauteous and her old face new.
  Lo, thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
  For thee and for myself no quiet find."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 28",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "No rest in absence",
      "sonnet_text": "How can I then return in happy plight,
That am debarred the benefit of rest,
When day's oppression is not eased by night,
But day by night, and night by day, oppressed?
And each, though enemies to either's reign,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me:
The one by toil, the other with a chain
Of heavy thoughts, which daily turn to thee.
Day's favor, nightly's image, doth defeat
Both toil and rest, and makes my pain more strong;
But love's image, which the dark doth meet,
Is but a shadow, where the light doth wrong.
  But now the sun from me and thee is gone,
  And I'm myself, and what I see, is none."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 29",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Hope restored by love",
      "sonnet_text": "When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes,
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
And look upon myself and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
Desiring this man's art and that man's scope,
With what I most enjoy contented least;
Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,
Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate.
  For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings
  That then I scorn to change my state with kings."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 30",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Remembrance of loss and friendship",
      "sonnet_text": "When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste.
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
And weep afresh love's long since cancelled woe,
And moan th' expense of many a vanished sight.
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
  But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
  All losses are restored and sorrows end."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 31",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth holds all lost friends",
      "sonnet_text": "Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts
Which I by loss have loved, those high-loved friends
Whom death hath razed from all but my poor parts,
And all the treasure of my love's deep ends
In thee are counted. Therefore all the days
My eyes are filled with shadows of thy name,
And every soul hath taken new ways
To steal a good of thee to give them fame.
Thou art the grave where buried love doth lie,
And thy face is the register of friends,
Whom I saw parted, where thy form is high,
That thou mayst say they are not truly lost.
  O, then best work, where most best form is shown,
  A painted image on a painted ground."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 32",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Posthumous comparison of poems",
      "sonnet_text": "If thou survive my well-contented day,
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,
And shalt by fortune once more look upon
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
Compare them with the bettering of the time,
And though they be outstripped by every pen,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O, then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
To march in ranks of better equipage.
  But since he died, and poets better write,
  Their verses are but better, mine are truer right.'"
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 33",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The sun of the youth's presence",
      "sonnet_text": "Full many a glorious morning have I seen
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace.
Even so my sun one early morn did shine
With all triumphing splendor on my brow;
But out, alack, he was but one hour mine,
The region cloud hath masked him from me now.
  Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth:
  Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 34",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth's trespass and apology",
      "sonnet_text": "Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
To blot thy beauty's triumph with a smoke?
Those clouds removed, an hour of sunny shower
Thy sweetness would not make me whole again,
For some slight sorrow of my lost hour
Will still remain, though not so sharp the pain.
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss.
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
  Ah, but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
  And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 35",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Self-forgiveness and sin",
      "sonnet_text": "No more be grieved at that which thou hast done.
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
Excusing thy foul deeds with words fair.
For to thy self too grievously thou err'st,
When that my sin is but a fault of thine,
That even my tongue is so much thy dear guest
To make a sweetmeat of my heart's disdain.
  All petty trespasses, and all they fail,
  That are thine own, do I to thy heart bring."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 36",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Separate lives, shared love",
      "sonnet_text": "Let me confess that we two must be twain,
Although our undivided loves are one.
So shall those blots that do with me remain
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Though in our lives a separation grows,
Which by thy beauty is to thee directed,
And I for both am forced to bear the woes.
Then do not thou with public kindness smile,
But forbear, lest they should me discover,
That in thy fame too deep, alas, I dwell,
But yet thou know'st the fault is in thy lover.
  I do by these my love lose all my claim,
  And yet thou lovest me, and I love thee name."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 37",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love's comfort in misfortune",
      "sonnet_text": "As a decrepit father takes delight
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Entitled in thy parts do crown with it
Thy love, that makes my loved fortune poor;
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Entitled in thy parts do crown with it
Thy love, that makes my loved fortune poor;
  So I am rich in that which thou presentest,
  And thou dost give me all my love's content."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 38",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth inspires the verse",
      "sonnet_text": "How can my Muse want subject to invent
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me
Worth noting, be; for thou art all my art,
And all my style, and all my memory
To make a new creation from my heart.
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Than that old invocation that did call
The poet's help from regions of the north,
Where now his soul is bound, and he in all.
  Thou art the light, and I the shadow's shade,
  And I'll be true to thee, though thou wert dead."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 39",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Praise in separation",
      "sonnet_text": "O, how thy worth with manners may I sing
When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?
And what is't but my own when I praise thee?
Even for this let us divide our loves,
And give thee that which is thine own, sweet boy,
That thou mayst stand in every place, and prove
By thine own dignity, a separate joy.
Then will I praise thee, when thou art away,
That thus by absence I may praise thee still;
And that which now is but a single day,
May in my verse be famed for greater skill.
  So I, my self from my self must be led,
  And by thee, my other self, my fame be spread."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 40",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth's theft of the mistress",
      "sonnet_text": "Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all;
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
Then, if for my love thou usest my love so,
I count it but a copy of my deeds.
But yet be warned: thy heart knows, and I know,
That love is much the worse for being loved.
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;
And yet love knows it is a greater grief
To have thee than to lose thee for myself.
  Ah, but thou know'st that love is more than love,
  And loving love, thou dost my heart much prove."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 41",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth's easy seduction",
      "sonnet_text": "Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;
And when a woman woos, what woman's son
Will sourly leave her till she have prevailed?
Ay me, but yet thou mightst my dear excuse
Thy pleasure in their lack of means, so bad,
That, having thee, that hast my love in use,
Thou art the cause of both my love and loss.
  But here's the fine, that by this loose transgression,
  Thy beauty and my love are both in question."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 42",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Double loss, double comfort",
      "sonnet_text": "That thou hast her, it is not all my grief,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief,
A loss in love that touches me most nearly.
Loving both of you, she loves you not at all;
She loves you best, to give you my whole heart.
For by this loss, I'll love her best of all,
Who loved her not at all till she loved you.
But here's the fine, that I am lost in you,
And you, my love, are lost in her, and she
By both of you, my heart hath been misled,
To find my sorrow, where my joy should be.
  But this is all, the total of the whole:
  I lose my friend, and my friend's loss my soul."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 43",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Sight in darkness (absence)",
      "sonnet_text": "When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
For all the day they view things unrespected;
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
And, darkly bright, are admirably detected.
For then my nobler part, brought to a shade,
Upon the eyes' dark state can well reflect
If the dark should show thee, what wealth of trade
Thou bring'st in dreams to bless the night's defect!
How would all eyes then feast, what fortunes see,
When that fair sun which all my life is in,
Should shine by day, by day, and night by night,
And every soul find what his love should find.
  All days are nights to see till I see thee,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 44",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Distance and the elements",
      "sonnet_text": "If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way;
For then, despite of space, I would be brought
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
No matter then although my feet were slow,
For then soul's motion should not be confined;
Swift as thy thoughts would I both come and go,
Even though the world did bar me from thy mind.
But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought,
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But heavy earth and water, all my lot,
Are my dull elements, and soon I groan.
  For when these gross parts waste, the soul is dead,
  And thoughts are only thoughts, and nothing else."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 45",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The quick elements",
      "sonnet_text": "The other two, slight air and purging fire,
Are both with thee, wherever thou dost abide;
The first my thought, the other my desire,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
For when these quick companions are away,
My dull substance starves itself for lack
Of all those comforts that do me sustain,
And my poor life is but a heart-sick rack.
But when they part, as often they do run,
These tender messengers of my love's heart,
I then remember that I see the sun,
And then I know the truth of every art.
  But soon they part, and their quick return
  My love doth tell me that I shall not mourn."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 46",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Heart vs. eye over possession",
      "sonnet_text": "Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
Mine eye my heart thy picture would bar,
My heart my eye the freedom of that right.
My heart doth plead that in him thou dost lie,
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes;
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
And says in him thy fair resemblance lies.
To 'cide this title is impanelled
A jury of all my thoughts, the chief-endured,
Who through the eye's assent are still upheld,
That with the heart's dear love are still allured.
  Thus is the war of heart and eye subdued,
  And so the eye's part hath the heart's true due."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 47",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Truce between heart and eye",
      "sonnet_text": "Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
And each doth good turns now unto the other.
When that mine eye is famished for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
Another time mine eye is my love's guest,
And in his thoughts thy sweet form is a part.
Thus by thy picture I am fed with light,
And by thy thoughts both are revived anew;
How many nights and days I steal from night,
To play with thee, that so I might have you.
  Thus are mine eyes with me, and I with thee,
  And thoughts, though absent, comfort me."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 48",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Fear of theft",
      "sonnet_text": "How careful was I when I took my way,
Each trifling thing was put in safe custody,
To bear the inventory of what I lay
Up, to my use, for all my journey.
But thou, my jewel, in all places
Art left unsecured, and thou art all my store,
Which, like a wanderer, keeps all my graces,
And leaves me to myself, no more and more.
But thou, to whom I gave all to be kept,
Art left a prey to every careless hand,
And what by me, that now I find out wept,
Is that I have no stronger bond.
  No, none but this, if thou wilt be my fear:
  That thou shouldst be to every other near."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 49",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Anticipating rejection",
      "sonnet_text": "Against that time, if ever that time come,
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When as thy love hath done its utmost sum,
And all my services are held suspects;
Against that time, when I shall thee possess
No longer but for love's dear, doting heart,
When love converted from his sweetness is
And all the signs of friendship fly apart,
Against that time I take my leave of thee,
As a due debt that I have paid before,
For thee to use thy power upon me;
I do not blame thee, for I did not know.
  To leave me naked to the world's wide hate,
  Is to be wise and to prevent my fate."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 50",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Sorrow of travel (absence)",
      "sonnet_text": "How heavy do I journey on the way,
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
Doth teach that ease and that delay
To spend that time, which I did not intend?
Thus grief, being an impediment to give
The body's ease, makes my way longer seem,
And makes me travel where I do not live,
As if I still were dreaming a false dream.
When I do ask my horse why he is slow,
And answer makes, he knows my spirit is dull,
I tell him this: that I am far from you,
And that his pace is too swift for my will.
  For when the heart is full of grief and care,
  The slowest pace is still more than is due."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 51",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Eagerness for return",
      "sonnet_text": "Thus can my love excuse the slow offense
Of my dull horse, that doth my woe reprove,
To get him speed, and my excuse's sense
Will serve not to show reason for my love.
For, thought being but a messenger of thought,
And he but thought, no quicker than he is,
Cannot excuse the slow return to naught,
When I should speed, and I am far from bliss.
Then, vainly thinking, hasten to my horse,
And make him fly faster than the wind,
To bear me back where I was born to lose
My self, which is my all, and left behind.
  Then, no excuse can my love truly use,
  But I must run, and you must pity me."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 52",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The treasure of rare meetings",
      "sonnet_text": "So am I as the rich, whose blessed key
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
The which he will not every day survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Therefore are feasts so seldom and so rare,
Because they are but as a holy day,
When all men live in joy and free from care,
Which once departed, no more joy can say.
So proud I am of this exchange of mine,
And what a precious thing I have in keep,
Which I with faith and truth do still confine
To my most private use, to hold from sleep.
  Therefore all pleasures that are won by sweat,
  Are treasures kept for use, but not for beat."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 53",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The ubiquity of the youth's beauty",
      "sonnet_text": "What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every external grace, that others fade,
In you is full, and takes no end.
How far can you go to be but yourself,
That every virtue, which is now in you,
Does not appear to be of nature's self,
But by your side, it seems to grow anew?
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Is poorly imitated in your hue;
Figure Helen, and her self is dead,
And yet, in all, the copy is not true.
  In you all beauties, which do grow in earth,
  Are there contained, and all that heaven can show."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 54",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Truth and beauty, perfume of verse",
      "sonnet_text": "O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
For that sweet odor which doth in it live.
The canker blooms have full as deep a dye
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
Hang on a thorn when summer's time is nigh,
And when they die, their leaves are but as drosses.
But, for their virtue only is their show,
They live unwooed and unrespected fade,
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odors made.
  And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
  When that is done, your virtue will be there."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 55",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Immortal verse (marble and bronze)",
      "sonnet_text": "Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
  So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
  You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 56",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love's renewal after satiety",
      "sonnet_text": "Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Which but today by feeding is allayed,
Tomorrow sharpens, craving both the more.
So, love, be thou; although thou hast thy full,
Thy morning beauty in the evening dies,
Which in the morn doth make thee new again,
And gives thee new sight of thine own sweet eyes.
Then if to-morrow thou give thee new store,
And thy dear self renew, so that I may
Give me new life, that I may love thee more,
And thou be fresh, though thou art old and gray.
  For as the sea doth make no noise upon the shore,
  So love doth still increase, and none can tell wherefore."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 57",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The poet's slavery to the youth",
      "sonnet_text": "Being your slave, what should I do but tend
Upon the hours and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend,
Nor services to do, till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for thee,
Nor dare I question with my jealous power
Where you may be, or your affairs what be.
But, like a sad slave, stay and think on you,
And, whilst I think of you, do not complain,
For I am nothing but what you make me, too,
And in your grace all my desires remain.
  Then, love, love on; not all my jealous fear
  Shall dare to ask what you have done and where."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 58",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Waiting and freedom (The youth's license)",
      "sonnet_text": "That God forbid that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand th' account of hours crave,
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure.
O, let me suffer, being at your beck,
The imprisoned absence of your liberty,
And patience, tame to sufferance, learn to check
Those thoughts that may do want of reverence be.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
That ever calls your grace to me at last,
But like a sad slave, stay and think on you,
And, whilst I think of you, I'll not complain.
  For why, your liberty is but your will,
  And when your will is mine, all is well."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 59",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth's superiority to the past",
      "sonnet_text": "If there be nothing new, but that which is
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
Which, laboring for invention, bear amiss
The second burden of a former child!
O, that record could with a backward look
Even of five hundred courses of the sun
Show me your image in some antique book,
Since mind at first in character was done!
That I might see what the old world did say
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Whether they would in that delighted day
Of beauty's store have called you by your name.
  But since my thought cannot find form so high,
  I'll call you the first image of the eye."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 60",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Time's destruction and poetry's defiance",
      "sonnet_text": "Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.
  And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,
  Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 61",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Jealous watching",
      "sonnet_text": "Is it your will your image should keep open
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st to me
To chide my slumbers, and to stop my rest?
Or dost thou know, if I should sleep on thee,
I should forget all beauty, and be blessed?
No, 'tis my love that keeps mine eye awake,
Mine own true love, that keeps me still in thought
Of thy fair image, for thy sweet name's sake,
That gives me nothing, yet doth all afford.
  For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
  From me far off, with others all too near."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 62",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Self-love and its cure",
      "sonnet_text": "Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye,
And all my soul, and all my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
No shape so true, no truth so fair as that
Which in my glass doth daily change with time,
And still my love is in that state.
But when my glass shows me myself indeed,
Bat with the time's harsh hand against my face,
I see the wrinkles that my youth doth bleed,
And I do hate my own decay.
  'Tis thee, my self, that I do then behold,
  And love thee new in all I count my old."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 63",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Anticipating the youth's decay",
      "sonnet_text": "Against my love shall be as I am now,
With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn,
When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow
With lines and wrinkles, and his beauty scorned.
When Time hath made a feast upon my life,
And only kept my name to be his tomb,
Then all my beauties will be buried in strife,
And all my grace be lost in time to come.
Then will I hope to keep thy memory
In that black ink my love shall still live bright,
And all my verse shall be as monuments
To keep thy beauty in the world's despite.
  For fear of which, wear your sweet self away,
  And keep your beauty still in my love's eye."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 64",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Contemplation of mortality and loss",
      "sonnet_text": "When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;
When sometime lofty towers I see down-rased,
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the wat'ry main,
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store;
When I have seen such interchange of state,
Or state itself confounded to decay,
Ruins of time, and all things dedicate
To vast destruction, swift all bear away:
  This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
  But weep to have that which it fears to lose."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 65",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Poetry's lasting power",
      "sonnet_text": "Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out
Against the wrackful siege of battering days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong, but time decays?
O, fearful meditation! Where, alack,
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
  O, none, unless this miracle have might,
  That in black ink my love may still shine bright."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 66",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Weariness of the world",
      "sonnet_text": "Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
As, to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimmed in jollity,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And gilded honor shamefully misplaced,
And maiden virtue rudely prostituted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And strength by limping sway disabled,
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And folly doctor-like controlling skill,
And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
And captive good attending captain ill.
  Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
  Save that, to die, I leave my love alone."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 67",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth's true beauty (no cosmetics)",
      "sonnet_text": "Ah, wherefore lives he now in wretched state,
Sullied with all defects a man may have,
That he can live to make his beauty great,
When all the world's but a painted slave?
Why did Nature make his face so fair,
When her best store is dressed in all her pride,
But that the world should in his love despair,
And all his beauty to the world denied?
Why else doth Nature weep and mourn, as she
Found nothing worthy to compare with thee,
But that thy beauty should be Nature's fee,
To make more fair the beautiful in thee?
  To shame the world, and set a pattern for us,
  She keeps him to herself, and is not false."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 68",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth as Nature's pattern",
      "sonnet_text": "Thus is his cheek the map of every beauty
Which is in Nature's treasure safely kept,
Before the date of beauty's cankered duty,
And Nature's best without a borrowed feature wept.
For Nature's use, Nature did him create
To show art's falsehood, what they are in deed,
When they do trim dead hair with art's false state,
And set a new life where the old doth bleed.
He is the creature whom Nature's hand doth frame,
And to the world a fair example gave,
To shame the copy now they would reclaim,
And set a new-made life in Nature's grave.
  All this for you, that you might be the theme
  To show the world how Nature did redeem."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 69",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Scandal's tongue; inner vice",
      "sonnet_text": "Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
Are those the world's report approves most praise;
If those parts thou dost stay at one renew,
How can the world's report deny thy grace?
To the outward form they render out a voice,
To thy fair outside, the world's public tongue
They do commend, and have no other choice
But where the eye is fed, the heart is stung.
Then every tongue, that speaks thy fair, doth say
Thou hast all beauty's grace, and thou art fair,
But every eye that in thy soul doth weigh
Will find thy sins, and thy disgrace doth bear.
  They look into the beauty of thy soul,
  And that is black, where beauty should control."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 70",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Slander as a proof of virtue",
      "sonnet_text": "That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;
The ornament of beauty is suspicion,
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
Thy worth the greater, being wooed of time,
Who can corrupt what time can not remove,
But for thy sake, doth hold thee up from crime.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of this time,
Which in thy body doth a canker spread;
But thou art not corrupted by this time,
For slander's tongue is ever on the dead.
  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Then thou wert all my heaven, as thou art now."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 71",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Urging the youth to forget him after death",
      "sonnet_text": "No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell.
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
The hand that writ it, for I love you so
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
O, if, I say, you look upon this verse
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse,
But let your love even with my life decay,
  Lest the wise world should look into your moan
  And mock you with me after I am gone."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 72",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Posthumous self-slander",
      "sonnet_text": "O, lest the world should task you to recite
What merit lived in me that you should love,
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang upon my tomb, to glorify
My worthless name with praise, by which my heart
May get a better fame than it deserves,
And prove you all my love, and all my art,
That all my verse is but the love that serves
To keep your name and mine forever new.
  And, seeing this, that you should do for me,
  I am content to be forgot by thee."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 73",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Approaching death (Autumn, Twilight, Fire)",
      "sonnet_text": "That time of year thou mayst in me behold
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou seest the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
In me thou seest the glowing of such fire
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the deathbed whereon it must expire,
Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
  This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
  To love that well which thou must leave ere long."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 74",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The poet's spirit in his verse",
      "sonnet_text": "But be contented when that fell arrest
Without all bail shall carry me away,
My life hath ended, and that is the best,
And all my parts shall turn to common clay.
From that vile dust, which doth thy spirit mark,
Will make me live, when I am dead and gone,
And thou shalt have no sorrow, for the dark
Of my death is but life that you live on.
For all that beauty that doth cover thee
Is but the rind of all my art, and mine
Is but the body's part, which turn to me,
And to thy sweet self, all that is divine.
  The worth of that is that which I confine,
  To thee, my soul, that liv'st in this line."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 75",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love as nourishment",
      "sonnet_text": "So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As twixt a miser and his wealth is found:
Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
Doubtful as a jealous lover of his prize;
Now all the world is but to look upon,
And now to look no further than my eyes.
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
And by and by clean starved for a look;
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
Save what is had or must from you be took.
  Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
  And glutting grow, yet do not live to pay."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 76",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The poet's plain style",
      "sonnet_text": "Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
So far from variation or quick change?
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted range?
Why, having such a theme to write upon,
As yet was never used in time before,
Should all my days be in this fashion done,
And all my rhymes but one set-forth before?
O, know, sweet love, I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument;
So all my words are but an old new song,
And all my verse is but the love I meant.
  For as the sun is daily new and old,
  So is my love still telling what is told."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 77",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Use of the notebook (tables)",
      "sonnet_text": "Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
And of this book, both thee and me to taste.
Which of those three doth make thee most forlorn,
To see thy beauty's form, and not to fill
The vacant leaves, where all thy thoughts are born,
With all thy learning and thy love's true will?
Look what thy memory can not contain
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
Those children nursed, delivered from the pain
Of sad oblivion, and in thee confined.
  These tell thee nothing, but thou mayst invent
  Thy own dear thoughts, and my love's content."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 78",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The rivalry of other poets",
      "sonnet_text": "So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse,
And found such fair assistance in my verse,
As every alien pen hath got my use,
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Thine eyes, that taught all eyes to see new light,
Have added feathers to the learned's wing,
And given grace to the unlearned's plight,
To make the lame with fullest measure sing.
But thou art all my art, and dost advance
As high as learning my rude ignorance;
But when they write, they do but do thee wrong,
And put a spirit in my simple song.
  For when thy love doth teach me thus to write,
  I am as proud as if I were their wit."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 79",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The other poet's debt",
      "sonnet_text": "Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
But now my gracious numbers are dismayed,
And my sick Muse doth give another place.
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
And my sick Muse doth now in silence bent
To hear his praise, that doth thy beauty lend.
Yet what he says, or what of thee he writes,
But what he borrows of thy self, and thine,
And what is mine, and more, which he indites,
He steals from thee, or doth thy praise confine.
  He lends thee virtue, and doth thee commend,
  But thou art the theme, and he the borrower's friend."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 80",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Rivalry (the 'saucy bark')",
      "sonnet_text": "O, how I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To make me slighted, old, and put to shame!
But since your name is worthy of a verse,
And mine is such, as is but poor and low,
It is my only fear that I should err,
And that my words should not deserve to grow.
My saucy bark, inferior far to his,
On your broad main doth but too boldly sail,
Your shallowest help will bring me to that bliss,
While he upon your ocean doth prevail.
  Yet, if you suffer the one to conquer me,
  I'll call my death my love's dear victory."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 81",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Immortal verse (no tomb)",
      "sonnet_text": "Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die;
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,
When all the breathers of this world are dead.
  You still shall live--such virtue hath my pen--
  Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 82",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth's reading habits",
      "sonnet_text": "I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
Thou art as fair in all men's loving eye
As any mother's child, though not her son,
And therefore mayst thou with the world's eye
Look on what every author's pen hath done.
What's the effect of these, but to say less
Than is the truth of that which you possess?
Your single excellence, that doth express
All grace, that doth all other graces dress.
  And when a better wit doth all your praises show,
  The world will say, 'He hath a worthier pen to know.'"
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 83",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The inadequacy of silence and verse",
      "sonnet_text": "I never saw that you did want my song,
And therefore kept my verse from growing old;
I did not need to write, to make you strong,
Since you yourself are of that worth untold.
Then was I silent, being afraid to wrong
Your beauty, which to me is all the grace;
And when I do write, I do but do you wrong,
For my poor verse cannot deserve a place.
Believe me, love, not all the ink that flows
Shall ever write of that which you possess;
For since your beauty all the world o'ergrows,
There is no form that can that worth express.
  Then, though I be not so much in your love,
  Yet I will write, to prove my pen not slow."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 84",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Praise of self-sufficience",
      "sonnet_text": "Who is it that says most which can say more
Than this rich praise, that you alone are you?
In whose effect the world is all the store,
But in your own dear self is all the due.
Be not self-willed, for you are what you see,
And in your glass your self-love doth appear;
But when you write, you but yourself destroy,
And that which others write, to you is dear.
For if you write of you, that world will say
Such as you are, is but a painted face;
But if you write of others, that sweet sway
Will make your praise grow in every place.
  Then write, dear boy, and change your will today,
  And you shall still be young, and you shall still be gay."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 85",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The poet's 'silent' praise",
      "sonnet_text": "My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,
Reserve their character with golden quill,
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
I think good thoughts, while others write good words,
And hold my peace, when others praise your name;
And therefore may I not be well compared
To those that in your verse can do the same.
But when your worth makes others' wit seem fine,
My love, though dumb, is but my heart's dear thought,
That for your sake is such as is most thine,
And all the rest are but a little naught.
  Then love that Muse which simpler shows thy worth,
  And bids me speak what love doth write of you."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 86",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The other poet's 'spirit'",
      "sonnet_text": "Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain rehearse,
And stopped my pen with fear of him and you?
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
But that your worth, too costly to be lost,
Did stop my pen, and had no reverence.
  For when your self of your self did write,
  My thoughts were all in your fair paper dight."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 87",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The youth's departure (farewell)",
      "sonnet_text": "Farewell! Thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate.
The charter of thy worth, great love, possessing,
Makes thee too rich for my poor state.
Then when thou say'st thou art by me removed,
I can but say I have no cause to stay;
For by this loss, I'll say I was too loved,
And that my love for thee was all my stay.
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter;
So thou, my love, a love I cannot utter,
Art lost to me, and I am lost in doubt.
  Thy gift, thy form, is but a fleeting lease,
  Which in thy worth, thou canst at will release."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 88",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Betrayal for the youth's sake",
      "sonnet_text": "When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
And place my merit in the lowest rank,
To right thee with all wrongs, I will indite,
And plead for thee against myself and thank
Thee for the wrong, that doth deny my right,
Lest thou shouldst think I did not love thee well,
And in my absence, make my state more bright,
By that true love, which in my verse shall dwell.
For thee, against myself I will be sworn,
And will accuse my self to prove thee true,
And by my love, thy beauty is new born,
And all my life is but a love of you.
  Thus I live still, thy true self to be,
  And all my thoughts are but a love of thee."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 89",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Anticipating rejection",
      "sonnet_text": "Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
And I will comment upon that offense.
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
Against thy reasons, and my poor defense.
Thou canst not love, though thou wouldst be removed,
For I will speak no slander of thy heart;
And though my love is all by thee approved,
Yet I will not from my dear self depart.
For if I say thou art my chief delight,
And that my love is all in thy fair face,
Then I must not say that my love is light,
But that I love thee still in every place.
  Yet do not so, but for my sake, I pray,
  Say that I loved thee, for my love's dear day."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 90",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Preemptive sorrow",
      "sonnet_text": "Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
And do not let me after lose the loss.
Ah, do not when my heart hath 'scaped this sorrow,
Come in the rearward of a conquered woe;
Give not a windy night a cloudy morrow,
But send me forth with all thy cruel show.
Do not in both, but from one take away
All that I owe to the world and to myself,
And let my griefs one for another pay,
That all my sorrow may be one poor shelf.
  If thou wilt leave me, do not stay for gold,
  But wait for the worst, that thou mayst then be told."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 91",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love's superiority; fear of loss",
      "sonnet_text": "Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
Some in their garments, though newfangled ill,
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
And every humor hath his adjunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest.
But these particulars are not my measure;
All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost,
Of more delight than hawks or horses be;
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast.
  Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
  All this away, and me most wretched make."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 92",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love's dependence on life; the fear of inconstancy",
      "sonnet_text": "But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs
When in the least of them my life hath end;
I see a better state to me belongs
Than that which on thy humor doth depend.
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
O, what a happy title do I find,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
  But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
  Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 93",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Blissful ignorance; beauty as a mask",
      "sonnet_text": "So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceived husband; so love's face
May still seem love to me, though altered new;
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
For there can live no hatred in thine eye;
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
In many's looks, the false heart's history
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
But heaven in thy creation did decree
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be,
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
  How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
  If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 94",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Stoic indifference; corrupted virtue ('Lilies that fester')",
      "sonnet_text": "They that have power to hurt and will do none,
That do not do the thing they most do show,
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces
And husband nature's riches from expense;
They are the lords and owners of their faces,
Others but stewards of their excellence.
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
Though to itself it only live and die;
But if that flower with base infection meet,
The basest weed outbraves his dignity.
  For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
  Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 95",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Beauty and scandal; vice disguised as grace",
      "sonnet_text": "How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise;
Naming thy name blesses an ill report.
O, what a mansion have those vices got
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot,
And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
  Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
  The hardest knife ill used doth lose his edge."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 96",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Faults transformed to graces; seductive power",
      "sonnet_text": "Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport.
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;
Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort.
As on the finger of a throned queen
The basest jewel will be well esteemed,
So are those errors that in thee are seen
To truths translated and for true things deemed.
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
How many gazers mightst thou lead away
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
  But do not so. I love thee in such sort
  As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 97",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Absence; The seasons reversed",
      "sonnet_text": "How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen,
What old December's bareness everywhere!
And yet this time removed was summer's time,
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease.
Yet this abundant issue seemed to me
But hope of orphans and unfathered fruit;
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And thou away, the very birds are mute;
  Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer
  That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 98",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Absence; Joylessness of spring",
      "sonnet_text": "From you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud-pied April, dressed in all his trim,
Hath put a spirit of youth in everything,
That heavy Saturn laughed and leapt with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odor and in hue
Could make me any summer's story tell,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew.
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
  Yet seemed it winter still, and, you away,
  As with your shadow I with these did play."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 99",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Theft of beauty; flower imagery",
      "sonnet_text": "The forward violet thus did I chide:
\"Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.\"
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair;
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
One blushing shame, another white despair;
A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both,
And to his robb'ry had annexed thy breath;
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker ate him up to death.
  More flowers I noted, yet I none could see
  But sweet or color it had stol'n from thee."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 100",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The Muse's silence; immortality through verse",
      "sonnet_text": "Where art thou, muse, that thou forget'st so long
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Dark'ning thy power to lend base subjects light?
Return, forgetful muse, and straight redeem
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Rise, resty muse; my love's sweet face survey
If Time have any wrinkle graven there.
If any, be a satire to decay
And make Time's spoils despised everywhere.
  Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life;
  So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 101",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The Muse's duty; truth and beauty",
      "sonnet_text": "O truant muse, what shall be thy amends
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
Make answer, muse. Wilt thou not haply say
\"Truth needs no color with his color fixed,
Beauty no pencil beauty's truth to lay;
But best is best if never intermixed\"?
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so, for 't lies in thee
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
  Then do thy office, muse; I teach thee how
  To make him seem long hence as he shows now."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 102",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love's maturity; silence in love",
      "sonnet_text": "My love is strengthened, though more weak in seeming;
I love not less, though less the show appear.
That love is merchandized whose rich esteeming
The owner's tongue doth publish everywhere.
Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing,
And stops his pipe in growth of riper days.
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
But that wild music burdens every bough,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
  Therefore, like her, I sometime hold my tongue,
  Because I would not dull you with my song."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 103",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Inadequacy of poetry; lover's beauty",
      "sonnet_text": "Alack, what poverty my muse brings forth,
That, having such a scope to show her pride,
The argument all bare is of more worth
Than when it hath my added praise beside.
O, blame me not if I no more can write!
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
That overgoes my blunt invention quite,
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful, then, striving to mend,
To mar the subject that before was well?
For to no other pass my verses tend
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell.
  And more, much more, than in my verse can sit
  Your own glass shows you when you look in it."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 104",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Time and unchanging beauty; three years passed",
      "sonnet_text": "To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burned,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
Ah, yet doth beauty, like a dial hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived;
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived.
  For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred:
  Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 105",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Constancy; the triple theme of perfection",
      "sonnet_text": "Let not my love be called idolatry,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
Kind is my love today, tomorrow kind,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
Therefore my verse, to constancy confined,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
\"Fair, kind, and true\" is all my argument,
\"Fair, kind, and true,\" varying to other words;
And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
  \"Fair,\" \"kind,\" and \"true\" have often lived alone,
  Which three till now never kept seat in one."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 106",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Prophecy of beauty; time and verse",
      "sonnet_text": "When in the chronicle of wasted time
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
Then in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have expressed
Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
And, for they looked but with divining eyes,
They had not skill enough your worth to sing.
  For we, which now behold these present days,
  Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 107",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Triumph over fate; immortality",
      "sonnet_text": "Not mine own fears nor the prophetic soul
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes;
  And thou in this shalt find thy monument
  When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 108",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Eternal love; renewal of vows",
      "sonnet_text": "What's in the brain that ink may character
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?
What's new to speak, what now to register,
That may express my love or thy dear merit?
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
I must each day say o'er the very same,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.
So that eternal love in love's fresh case
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
  Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Where time and outward form would show it dead."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 109",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Apology for absence; fidelity",
      "sonnet_text": "O, never say that I was false of heart,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify;
As easy might I from myself depart
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie.
That is my home of love. If I have ranged,
Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
So that myself bring water for my stain.
Never believe, though in my nature reigned
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
That it could so preposterously be stained
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good.
  For nothing this wide universe I call,
  Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 110",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Confession of faults; testing love",
      "sonnet_text": "Alas, 'tis true, I have gone here and there
And made myself a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Made old offenses of affections new.
Most true it is that I have looked on truth
Askance and strangely; but by all above,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
Now all is done, have what shall have no end.
Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
  Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
  Even to thy pure and most most loving breast."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 111",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Fortune's fault; public shame",
      "sonnet_text": "O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
That did not better for my life provide
Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand;
And almost thence my nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand.
Pity me, then, and wish I were renewed,
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection;
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance, to correct correction.
  Pity me, then, dear friend, and I assure ye
  Even that your pity is enough to cure me."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 112",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love as a cure; disregard for public opinion",
      "sonnet_text": "Your love and pity doth th' impression fill
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow;
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you o'ergreen my bad, my good allow?
You are my all the world, and I must strive
To know my shames and praises from your tongue;
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong.
In so profound abysm I throw all care
Of others' voices that my adder's sense
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
  You are so strongly in my purpose bred
  That all the world besides methinks are dead."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 113",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Absence; distorted sight",
      "sonnet_text": "Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind,
And that which governs me to go about
Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch;
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch.
For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
The most sweet favor or deformed'st creature,
The mountain or the sea, the day or night,
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
  Incapable of more, replete with you,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine eye untrue."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 114",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Flattery; the eye's alchemy",
      "sonnet_text": "Or whether doth my mind, being crowned with you,
Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true,
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
To make of monsters and things indigest
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Creating every bad a perfect best
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
O, 'tis the first: 'tis flattery in my seeing,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up.
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is greeing,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup.
  If it be poisoned, 'tis the lesser sin
  That mine eye loves it and doth first begin."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 115",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Growth of love; retraction of earlier vows",
      "sonnet_text": "Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer;
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
But reckoning time, whose millioned accidents
Creep in 'twixt vows and change decrees of kings,
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
Divert strong minds to th' course of alt'ring things--
Alas, why, fearing of time's tyranny,
Might I not then say \"Now I love you best,\"
When I was certain o'er incertainty,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
  Love is a babe. Then might I not say so,
  To give full growth to that which still doth grow."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 116",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Definition of love; constancy",
      "sonnet_text": "Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds
Or bends with the remover to remove.
O, no, it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wand'ring bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle's compass come;
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
  If this be error, and upon me proved,
  I never writ, nor no man ever loved."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 117",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Self-accusation; testing love",
      "sonnet_text": "Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
And given to time your own dear-purchased right;
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Book both my willfulness and errors down,
And on just proof surmise accumulate;
Bring me within the level of your frown,
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate,
  Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
  The constancy and virtue of your love."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 118",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Policy in love; misguided strategies",
      "sonnet_text": "Like as to make our appetites more keen
With eager compounds we our palate urge;
As to prevent our maladies unseen
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge;
Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
Thus policy in love, t' anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured,
And brought to medicine a healthful state
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured.
  But thence I learn, and find the lesson true:
  Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 119",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Benefit of ill; ruined and renewed love",
      "sonnet_text": "What potions have I drunk of siren tears
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
In the distraction of this madding fever!
O, benefit of ill! Now I find true
That better is by evil still made better;
And ruined love, when it is built anew,
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
  So I return rebuked to my content,
  And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 120",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Mutual unkindness; forgiveness",
      "sonnet_text": "That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And for that sorrow which I then did feel
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel.
For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As I by yours, you've passed a hell of time,
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
O, that our night of woe might have remembered
My deepest sense how hard true sorrow hits,
And soon to you as you to me then tendered
The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits!
  But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
  Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 121",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Self-defense; moral autonomy",
      "sonnet_text": "'Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
When not to be receives reproach of being,
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed
Not by our feeling but by others' seeing.
For why should others' false adulterate eyes
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
No, I am that I am; and they that level
At my abuses reckon up their own.
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown,
  Unless this general evil they maintain:
  All men are bad and in their badness reign."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 122",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Memory; disdain for external records",
      "sonnet_text": "Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Full charactered with lasting memory,
Which shall above that idle rank remain
Beyond all date, even to eternity--
Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart
Have faculty by nature to subsist;
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
Of thee, thy record never can be missed.
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To trust those tables that receive thee more.
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee
  Were to import forgetfulness in me."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 123",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Defiance of Time; constancy",
      "sonnet_text": "No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change.
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
They are but dressings of a former sight. 
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire
Than think that we before have heard them told.
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wond'ring at the present nor the past;
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
  This I do vow, and this shall ever be:
  I will be true despite thy scythe and thee."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 124",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love free from Fortune; non-conforming love",
      "sonnet_text": "If my dear love were but the child of state,
It might for fortune's bastard be unfathered,
As subject to time's love or to time's hate,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.
No, it was builded far from accident;
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls.
It fears not policy, that heretic
Which works on leases of short-numbered hours,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.
  To this I witness call the fools of time,
  Which die for goodness who have lived for crime."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 125",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Rejection of outward show; true service",
      "sonnet_text": "Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy,
With my extern the outward honoring,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favor
Lose all and more by paying too much rent,
For compound sweet forgoing simple savor,
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art
But mutual render, only me for thee.
  Hence, thou suborned informer; a true soul
  When most impeached stands least in thy control."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 126",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The Fair Youth's final warning; Time's reckoning",
      "sonnet_text": "O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle hour;
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st
Thy lover's withering as thy sweet self grow'st.
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May Time disgrace, and wretched minutes kill.
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure.
Her audit, though delayed, answered must be,
And her quietus is to render thee."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 127",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The Dark Lady; redefining beauty (black is beautiful)",
      "sonnet_text": "In the old age, black was not counted fair,
Or, if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
But now is black beauty's successive heir,
And beauty slandered with a bastard shame.
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,
Fairing the foul with art's false borrowed face,
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
Sland'ring creation with a false esteem.
  Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe,
  That every tongue says beauty should look so."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 128",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Jealousy of objects; sensual desire",
      "sonnet_text": "How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand.
To be so tickled they would change their state
And situation with those dancing chips,
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Making dead wood more blest than living lips.
  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 129",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Lust; condemnation of desire",
      "sonnet_text": "Th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action; and, till action, lust
Is perjured, murd'rous, bloody, full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;
Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight;
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had,
Past reason hated as a swallowed bait
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;
A bliss in proof and proved a very woe;
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
  All this the world well knows, yet none knows well
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 130",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Anti-Petrarchan; realistic love",
      "sonnet_text": "My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
I have seen roses damasked, red and white,
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
And in some perfumes is there more delight
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
That music hath a far more pleasing sound.
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground.
  And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare
  As any she belied with false compare."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 131",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Cruelty; deeds as the true flaw",
      "sonnet_text": "Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to myself alone.
And, to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
One on another's neck do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
  In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
  And thence this slander as I think proceeds."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 132",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Mourning eyes; pity and grace",
      "sonnet_text": "Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
Have put on black, and loving mourners be,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Better becomes the gray cheeks of the east,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even
Doth half that glory to the sober west
As those two mourning eyes become thy face.
O, let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
  Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 133",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love triangle; enslavement",
      "sonnet_text": "Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me.
Is 't not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed;
Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken,
A torment thrice threefold thus to be crossed.
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail.
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
Thou canst not then use rigor in my jail.
  And yet thou wilt, for I, being pent in thee,
  Perforce am thine, and all that is in me."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 134",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Usury of love; the friend as collateral",
      "sonnet_text": "So, now I have confessed that he is thine
And I myself am mortgaged to thy will,
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still.
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
For thou art covetous, and he is kind;
He learned but surety-like to write for me
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Thou usurer that put'st forth all to use,
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
  Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me.
  He pays the whole, and yet am I not free."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 135",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Wordplay (Will); sexual desire",
      "sonnet_text": "Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will,
And will to boot, and will in overplus.
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
The sea, all water, yet receives rain still,
And in abundance addeth to his store;
So thou, being rich in will, add to thy will
One will of mine to make thy large will more.
  Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill.
  Think all but one, and me in that one will."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 136",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Wordplay (Will); explicit desire",
      "sonnet_text": "If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy will,
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there.
Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfill.
Will will fulfill the treasure of thy love,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
In things of great receipt with ease we prove
Among a number one is reckoned none.
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy store's account I one must be.
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
That nothing me, a something, sweet, to thee.
  Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
  And then thou lovest me, for my name is Will."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 137",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Blindness of love; self-deception",
      "sonnet_text": "Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes
That they behold and see not what they see?
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
If eyes, corrupt by overpartial looks,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Why should my heart think that a several plot
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not,
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
  In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
  And to this false plague are they now transferred."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 138",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Mutual lying; the truth of falsehood",
      "sonnet_text": "When my love swears that she is made of truth
I do believe her though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutored youth,
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue;
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed.
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love loves not to have years told.
  Therefore I lie with her and she with me,
  And in our faults by lies we flattered be."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 139",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Cruelty; jealousy",
      "sonnet_text": "O, call not me to justify the wrong
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
Use power with power, and slay me not by art.
Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight,
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside.
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more than my o'erpressed defense can bide?
Let me excuse thee: ah, my love well knows
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries.
  Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
  Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 140",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Warning against cruelty; fear of scandal",
      "sonnet_text": "Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain,
Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so,
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know.
For if I should despair, I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee.
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
  That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
  Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 141",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Love against the senses; perverse passion",
      "sonnet_text": "In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote.
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
To any sensual feast with thee alone.
But my five wits nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man,
Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be.
  Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
  That she that makes me sin awards me pain."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 142",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Mutual sin; self-justification through comparison",
      "sonnet_text": "Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving.
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving.
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Robbed others' beds' revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov'st those
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee;
Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
  If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
  By self-example mayst thou be denied."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 143",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Neglect; the housewife analogy; desire as a babe",
      "sonnet_text": "Lo, as a careful huswife runs to catch
One of her feathered creatures broke away,
Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
To follow that which flies before her face,
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,
Whilst I, thy babe, chase thee afar behind.
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me
And play the mother's part: kiss me, be kind.
  So will I pray that thou mayst have thy will,
  If thou turn back and my loud crying still."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 144",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The love triangle; good vs. evil (angel vs. devil)",
      "sonnet_text": "Two loves I have, of comfort and despair,
That like two spirits do suggest me still.
My better angel is a man right fair,
My worser spirit a woman colored ill.
To win me soon to hell my female evil
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her fair pride.
And whether that my angel be turned fiend
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
For being both to me, both to each friend,
I guess one angel in another's hell.
  The truth I shall not know, but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 145",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Punning; the saving retraction; love vs. hate",
      "sonnet_text": "Those lips that Love's own hand did make
Breathed forth the sound that said \"I hate\"
To me that languished for her sake;
But when she saw my woeful state,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
Was used in giving gentle doom,
And taught it thus anew to greet:
\"I hate\" she altered with an end
That followed it as gentle day
Doth follow night, who, like a fiend,
From heaven to hell is flown away.
  \"I hate\" from hate away she threw,
  And saved my life, saying \"not you.\""
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 146",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Soul vs. body; Christian devotion; eternal life",
      "sonnet_text": "Poor soul, the center of my sinful earth,
Pressed with these rebel powers that thee array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
Then, soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store.
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more.
  So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
  And Death once dead, there's no more dying then."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 147",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Fever of love; madness and unreason; betrayal",
      "sonnet_text": "My love is as a fever, longing still
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Th' uncertain sickly appetite to please.
My reason, the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
And, frantic-mad with evermore unrest,
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
At random from the truth vainly expressed.
  For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
  Who art as black as hell, as dark as night."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 148",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Blindness of love; corrupted sight; self-deception",
      "sonnet_text": "O me, what eyes hath love put in my head,
Which have no correspondence with true sight!
Or if they have, where is my judgment fled,
That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
What means the world to say it is not so?
If it be not, then love doth well denote
Love's eye is not so true as all men's \"no.\"
How can it? O, how can love's eye be true,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
No marvel then though I mistake my view;
The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.
  O cunning love, with tears thou keep'st me blind,
  Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 149",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Submission to cruelty; self-abasement; blindness",
      "sonnet_text": "Canst thou, O cruel, say I love thee not
When I against myself with thee partake?
Do I not think on thee when I forgot
Am of myself, all, tyrant, for thy sake?
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon?
Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
What merit do I in myself respect
That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
  But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
  Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 150",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Paradox of attraction; mysterious power; unworthy love",
      "sonnet_text": "O, from what power hast thou this powerful might
With insufficiency my heart to sway?
To make me give the lie to my true sight, and swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill, that in the very refuse of thy deeds
There is such strength and warrantise of skill that in my mind thy worst all best exceeds?
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more, the more I hear and see just cause of hate?
O, though I love what others do abhor, with others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  More worthy I to be beloved of thee."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 151",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Body vs. soul; explicit lust; physical betrayal",
      "sonnet_text": "Love is too young to know what conscience is;
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove.
For, thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross body's treason.
My soul doth tell my body that he may
Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason,
But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
  No want of conscience hold it that I call
  Her \"love,\" for whose dear love I rise and fall."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 152",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Perjury; broken vows; self-condemnation",
      "sonnet_text": "In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing;
In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee
When I break twenty? I am perjured most,
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee,
And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy;
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
Or made them swear against the thing they see.
  For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured eye,
  To swear against the truth so foul a lie."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 153",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Allegory of Cupid; love as disease; unquenchable fire",
      "sonnet_text": "Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep.
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground,
Which borrowed from this holy fire of Love
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
And grew a seething bath which yet men prove
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new fired,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
I, sick withal, the help of bath desired
And thither hied, a sad distempered guest,
  But found no cure. The bath for my help lies
  Where Cupid got new fire--my mistress' eyes."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 154",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Allegory of Cupid; love's fire; water vs. love",
      "sonnet_text": "The little love-god, lying once asleep,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
The fairest votary took up that fire,
Which many legions of true hearts had warmed;
And so the general of hot desire
Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarmed.
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
Growing a bath and healthful remedy
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,
  Came there for cure, and this by that I prove:
  Love's fire heats water; water cools not love."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 138 (Variant Text)",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "Mutual lying; feigned youth and truthfulness",
      "sonnet_text": "When my love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe her, though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutored youth,
Unskillful in the world's false forgeries.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although I know my years be past the best,
I, smiling, credit her false-speaking tongue,
Outfacing faults in love with love's ill rest.
But wherefore says my love that she is young?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O, love's best habit is a soothing tongue,
And age in love loves not to have years told.
  Therefore I'll lie with love, and love with me,
  Since that our faults in love thus smothered be."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 144 (Variant Text)",
      "purpose": "structure",
      "theme": "The love triangle; good vs. evil (angel vs. devil)",
      "sonnet_text": "Two loves I have, of comfort and despair,
That like two spirits do suggest me still.
My better angel is a man right fair,
My worser spirit a woman colored ill.
To win me soon to hell my female evil
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her fair pride.
And whether that my angel be turned fiend
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
For being both to me, both to each friend,
I guess one angel in another's hell.
  The truth I shall not know, but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out."
    },
    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 92: Behold that tree, in Autumn’s dim decay",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "autumn",
      "sonnet_text": "Behold that tree, in Autumn’s dim decay,
   Stripped by the frequent, chill, and eddying wind;
   Where yet some yellow, lonely leaves we find
   Lingering and trembling on the naked spray,
Twenty, perchance, for millions whirled away!
   Emblem, also! too just, of humankind!
   Vain man expects longevity, designed
   For few indeed; and their protracted day
What is it worth that Wisdom does not scorn?
   The blasts of sickness, care, and grief appal,
   That laid the friends in dust, whose natal morn
Rose near their own; and solemn is the call;
   Yet, like those weak deserted leaves forlorn,
   Shivering they cling to life, and fear to fall!"
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 84: While one sere leaf, that parting Autumn yields",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "autumn",
      "sonnet_text": "While one sere leaf, that parting Autumn yields,
   Trembles upon the thin, and naked spray,
   November, dragging on this sunless day,
   Lours, cold and sullen, on the watery fields;
And Nature to the waste dominion yields,
   Stripped her last robes, with gold and purple gay —
   So droops my life, of your soft beams despoiled,
   Youth, Health, and Hope, that long exulting smiled;
And the wild carols, and the bloomy hues
   Of merry Spring-time, spruce on every plain
   Her half-blown bushes, moist with sunny rain,
More pensive thoughts in my sunk heart infuse
   Than Winter’s grey, and desolate domain
   Faded like my lost Youth, that no bright Spring renews."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": " Stasis",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "autumn",
      "sonnet_text": " Before the leaves change, light transforms these lucid
speaking trees. The heavy drench of August
alters, things; its rich and sappy blood
relaxes where a thirst ago, no rest
released the roots' wet greed or stemmed their mad
need to be more. September is the wisest
time — neither the unbearable burning word
nor the form of it, cooped in its cold ghost.

How are they sombre — that unpicked apple, red,
undisturbed by its fall; calm of those wasp-bored amethyst
plums on the polished table? Body and head
easy in amity, a beam between that must,
unbalanced, quicken or kill, make new or dead
whatever these voices are that hate the dust."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 97: How like a winter hath my absence been",
      "purpose": "structure, theme",
      "theme": "autumn",
      "sonnet_text": "How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
What old December's bareness everywhere!
And yet this time remov'd was summer's time,
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burthen of the prime,
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit;
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And thou away, the very birds are mute;
Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 73: That time of year thou mayst in me behold",
      "purpose": "structure, theme",
      "theme": "autumn",
      "sonnet_text": "That time of year thou mayst in me behold
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed whereon it must expire,
Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by.
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
To love that well which thou must leave ere long."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "The Parlement of Fowls",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "spring",
      "sonnet_text": "Now welcome, somer, with thy sonne softe,
That hast this wintres wedres overshake,
And driven away the longe nyghtes blake!

Saynt Valentyn, that art ful hy on-lofte,
Thus syngen smale foules for thy sake:
Now welcome, somer, with thy sonne softe,
That hast this wintres wedres overshake.

Wel han they cause for to gladen ofte,
Sith ech of hem recovered hath hys make;
Ful blissful mowe they synge when they wake:
Now welcome, somer, with thy sonne softe
That hast this wintres wedres overshake
And driven away the longe nyghtes blake!"
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": " Complaint",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "spring",
      "sonnet_text": " 'Dear God,' they write, 'that was a selfish winter
to lean so long, unfairly on the spring!'
And now — this too much greed of seedy summer.
Mouths of the flowers unstick themselves and sting
the bees with irresistible dust. Iris
allow undignified inspection. Plain waste
weeds dress up in Queen Anne's lace. Our mist-
blue sky clouds heavily with clematis.

'Too much,' they cry, 'too much. Begin again.'
The Lord, himself a casualty of weather
falls to earth in large hot drops of rain.
The dry loam rouses in his scent, and under
him — moist, sweet, discriminate — the spring.
Thunder. Lightning. He can do anything."
    },



    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 91: On the fleet streams, the Sun, that late arose",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "spring",
      "sonnet_text": "On the fleet streams, the Sun, that late arose,
   In amber radiance plays; the tall young grass
   No foot hath bruised; clear morning, as I pass,
   Breathes the pure gale, that on the blossom blows;
And, as with gold yon green hill’s summit glows,
   The lake inlays the vale with molten glass:
   Now is the year’s soft youth, yet one, alas!
   Cheers not as it was wont; impending woes
Weigh on my heart; the joys, that once were mine,
   Spring leads not back; and those that yet remain
   Fade while she blooms. Each hour more lovely shine
Her crystal beams, and feed her floral train,
   But oh with pale, and warring fires, decline
   Those eyes, whose light my filial hopes sustain."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": " Between",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "summer",
      "sonnet_text": " The wet and weight of this half-born English winter
is not the weather of those fragmentary half-true willows
that break in the glass of the canal behind our rudder
as water arrives in our wake — a travelling arrow
of now, of now, of now. Leaves of the water
furl back from our prow, and as the pinnate narrow
seam of where we are drives through the mirror
of where we have to be, alder and willow
double crookedly, reverse, assume a power
to bud out tentatively in gold and yellow,
so it looks as if what should be end of summer —
seeds, dead nettles, berries, naked boughs —
is really the anxious clouding of first spring.
...'Real' is what water is imagining."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 18: Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?",
      "purpose": "structure, theme",
      "theme": "summer",
      "sonnet_text": "Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer’s lease hath all too short a date;
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or nature’s changing course untrimm'd;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st;
Nor shall death brag thou wander’st in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow’st:
   So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
   So long lives this, and this gives life to thee."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "The Parlement of Fowls",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "winter",
      "sonnet_text": "Now welcome, somer, with thy sonne softe,
That hast this wintres wedres overshake,
And driven away the longe nyghtes blake!

Saynt Valentyn, that art ful hy on-lofte,
Thus syngen smale foules for thy sake:
Now welcome, somer, with thy sonne softe,
That hast this wintres wedres overshake.

Wel han they cause for to gladen ofte,
Sith ech of hem recovered hath hys make;
Ful blissful mowe they synge when they wake:
Now welcome, somer, with thy sonne softe
That hast this wintres wedres overshake
And driven away the longe nyghtes blake!"
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "Glanmore Sonnets",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "winter",
      "sonnet_text": " He lived there in the unsayable lights.
He saw the fuchsia in a drizzling noon,
The elderflower at dusk like a risen moon
And green fields greying on the windswept heights.   
‘I will break through,’ he said, ‘what I glazed over   
With perfect mist and peaceful absences’—
Sudden and sure as the man who dared the ice   
And raced his bike across the Moyola River.   
A man we never saw. But in that winter
Of nineteen forty-seven, when the snow
Kept the country bright as a studio,
In a cold where things might crystallize or founder,   
His story quickened us, a wild white goose
Heard after dark above the drifted house."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "More Sonnets At Christmas",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "winter",
      "sonnet_text": " Again the native hour lets down the locks   
Uncombed and black, but gray the bobbing beard;   
Ten years ago His eyes, fierce shuttlecocks,   
Pierced the close net of what I failed: I feared   
The belly-cold, the grave-clout, that betrayed   
Me dithering in the drift of cordial seas;
Ten years are time enough to be dismayed
By mummy Christ, head crammed between his knees.   

Suppose I take an arrogant bomber, stroke   
By stroke, up to the frazzled sun to hear   
Sun-ghostlings whisper: Yes, the capital yoke—
Remove it and there’s not a ghost to fear   
This crucial day, whose decapitate joke   
Languidly winds into the inner ear."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet in the Shape of a Potted Christmas Tree",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "winter",
      "sonnet_text": "*
O
fury-
bedecked!
O glitter-torn!
Let the wild wind erect
bonbonbonanzas; junipers affect
frostyfreeze turbans; iciclestuff adorn
all cuckolded creation in a madcap crown of horn!
It’s a new day; no scapegrace of a sect
tidying up the ashtrays playing Daughter-in-Law Elect;
bells! bibelots! popsicle cigars! shatter the glassware! a son born
now
now
while ox and ass and infant lie
together as poor creatures will
and tears of her exertion still
cling in the spent girl’s eye
and a great firework in the sky
drifts to the western hill.
"
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "Sonnet 10: Lawrence, of virtuous father virtuous son",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "winter",
      "sonnet_text": "Lawrence, of virtuous father virtuous son,
       Now that the fields are dank, and ways are mire,
       Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire
       Help waste a sullen day; what may be won
From the hard season gaining? Time will run
       On smoother, till Favonius re-inspire
       The frozen earth, and clothe in fresh attire
       The lily and rose, that neither sow'd nor spun.
What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice,
       Of Attic taste, with wine, whence we may rise
       To hear the lute well touch'd, or artful voice
Warble immortal notes and Tuscan air?
       He who of those delights can judge, and spare
       To interpose them oft, is not unwise."
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": "Three Sonnets",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "winter",
      "sonnet_text": "Where I live      distance is the primal fact
The world is mostly      far away and small
Drifting along through cause and effect      like sleep
As when the distance      unlikeliest of stems
Bears the unlikely      blossom of the wind
Engendering our only weather      dry
Except in winter      pine trees live on snow
So greedy      pulling down these drifts that bury
The fences snap      the trunks of smaller trees
If the forest wants      to go somewhere it spreads
Like a prophecy      its snow before it
Technology      a distant windy cause
There is no philosophy      of death where I live
Only philosophies      of suffering"
    },

    {
      "sonnet_name": " This House",
      "purpose": "theme",
      "theme": "winter",
      "sonnet_text": " Which represents you, as my bones do, waits,
all pores open, for the stun of snow. Which will come,
as it always does, between breaths, between nights
of no wind and days of the nulled sun.
And has to be welcome. All instinct wants to anticipate
faceless fields, a white road drawn
through dependent firs, the soldered glare of lakes.

Is it wanting you here to want the winter in?
I breathe you back into your square house and begin
to live here roundly. This year will be between,
not in, four seasons. Do you hear already the wet
rumble of thaw? Stones. Sky. Streams. Sun.
Those might be swallows at the edge of sight
returning to last year's nest in the crook of the porchlight."
    }
  ]
}
